An archive can be as large as a library or as small as a bookshelf. 

What are the minimal requirements to build an archive? How does a pile of
haphazardly arranged papers differ from an archive? Look around you and notice
the furniture; navigate through your mobile device where you keep your notes
and your photos. Think of your social media usage, your habits of
correspondence, the way you keep in touch with your family and friends, the
habits of keeping a journal, taking notes, finding basic facts about the
world. All of these involve an archive of some kind. We are surrounded by
archives; we live in them and through them. Archives mediate. Like water for
fish, they form the medium of our knowledge gathering and finding activity.
If, as the headlines tell us, we live in an information age, archives are a
way of making sense of that information. More than making sense, they help
keep information *at hand*. An archive is a way of ordering things. It is a
site of mental as a well as physical activity.

Think of the archive as an interface between internal mental states---what I
know now---and the external, physical representation of that knowledge---what
I could know at any time. The book on my bookshelf is not just a book, it is a
part of my mental furnishings. I may not remember the contents of that book
for long, but I know where it is and how to find it. I know I could get to it
if needed.  It is not as close to me as a memory, accessible immediately and
at once, but also not as far as an obscure fact with which I have never had
any contact. The book on my shelf, the notebook in a pile on my desk, occupies
a space somewhere in the middle of the spectrum, between my rather limited
ability to remember a few ideas presently and the unlimited amount of ideas
out there. My documents, the ones that belong to me, the ones I organized
neatly on my desk and on my virtual desktop, are ideas that I used to have.
They are also a part of me, but just slightly farther away and outside of
myself than my thoughts. I feel safe knowing where they are and how to find
them.

Recall Samuel Beckett's play, *Krapp's Last Tape*, where the reader encounters
Krapp, a "wearish old man," who, every year, on his birthday, records a
message to himself and lovingly reviews old recordings as if to enter into a
conversation with himself, to encounter himself anew [@beckett_krapps_1960].
Who is Krapp, the play asks of the reader, if not a collection of these
memories and recordings? Krapp is at once an archivist and the archive. In
this ordinary way---through the continual activity of taking notes,
photographs, and recordings of ourselves, our friends, and our families---all
of us are implicated in the archival condition. Whatever it means to be
someone, a self, involves the enterprise of storage and retrieval. Think of
the discomfort we feel when someone disturbs our archives: if someone were to
reorganize your music collection for example, or scramble the order of your
notes, or rearrange the books on your bookshelf. One feels lost and violated
precisely because the archive is so crucial to our ability to find our way
through a forest of personal data. The archive, in this sense, is a small,
organized vessel of private order adrift in the midst of a vast and turbulent
sea of information.

Not all vessels of order are small and private. Some grow into imperial
armadas: state archives that project collective power. The aggregate of
personal memories gives us our shared, cultural memory, our heritage. That
sense of shared culture does not exist in the immaterial ether. It is
reflected in publicly and privately supported collections like the Library of
Congress and the Guggenheim Museum. These are large public archives,
preserving art and books---public in the sense of a collective enterprise (not
necessarily funding). They represent a vision of communal remembrance. It is
*a* vision, however, not *the* vision. It must not be mistaken for history or
for reality [@lacapra_history_1985; @spivak_rani_1985]. Someone, somewhere
made a decision about what to archive and where. State-sanctioned collections
reflect the priorities of a bureaucracy, resulting in archives like the State
Archive of the Russian Federation, Ottoman Archives, New York State Archives,
West Indies Federal Archives Centre, and China's Central Archives among many
others. Smaller, grass-roots public archives are often maintained by
independent organizations like the *Archiv der Jungendkulturen* in Berlin or
the North American Queer Zine Archive Project (QZAP) out of Minneapolis,
Minnesota.

Other dynamics come into play when the archives grow in size from small
vessels to fleets of knowledge. In the state archive we begin to think about
the forces of inclusion and exclusion [@richards_imperial_1993;
@greetham_whos_1999]. Who is allowed to enter and who isn't?  Which materials
are worthy preservation and which are relegated to the heap of perishable
ephemera? In this way archives can amplify certain historical narratives while
suppressing others. By its very design the archive conveys the logic of
differentiation. The archive of the empire casts divisions between center and
periphery. The archive of the court differentiates between criminals and
law-abiding citizens. The archive of the hospital embodies the distinction
between the healthy and sick. The archive of peer-reviewed scientific
publication separates meaningful knowledge from rumor or mere speculation.

Can there be an archive without records or documents? Do the contents of my
pocket---my keys, some change, a crumpled receipt, a piece of
lint---constitute an archive of a kind? What isn't an archive? I would argue
here that an archive requires at least these three components: first, a number
of documents or artifacts to be collected; second a place to store them; and
third, a system of organization.

An archive without records, documents, or artifacts would be an archive in the
name only. We could call it "the library of nothing" but for all purposes it
would resemble an empty room; it would be a promise of an archive---that is,
the promise of records, documents, or artifacts to come. Could we imagine an
archive without space? A virtual collection perhaps? Again, the question seems
nonsensical. A virtual archive, a website for example, is still a collection
of something occupying the same space, however virtual. An archive of
documents on paper, a list of books to be purchased for example, is again only
an idea, a promise of an archive. Proximity of material is required. Finally,
can an archive exist without a method of organization like a catalog or an
index? Again, it seems not. In the Jewish tradition, holy texts like the Torah
are not to be discarded. For this reason, special sealed rooms, called the
Genizah, have existed to house worn-out documents since the ancient times. The
discovery of such rooms have led to important contributions to the study of
liturgy and poetry in Judaic studies [@schechter_genizah_1998;
@schmelzer_contribution_1997]. But do the Genizah constitute an archive? Or do
they become an archive once they are discovered and cataloged? The catalog is
what gives the collection its order. Without the catalog a pile of papers on
my disk is just a pile. Add a catalog and it becomes an archive. The catalog
describes the documents and, most importantly, it tells us how and where to
find them. Document, architecture, and an epistemic order are all required to
constitute an archive. Let us examine each of these archival components in its
turn.

## Document

The archive is composed of *documents*---that is, physical objects of record.
From the infinitude of possible descriptions about reality, the record
preserves that which is important.[^record] Think of an obvious example, like
a police report. A police report captures the details relevant to an incident.
Police officers who would write a novel at the scene of the crime would be
dismissed of their duties. The archiving practice of law enforcement requires
records of a particular kind. The literary archive will contain documents
drastically different than those of a police report or a medical record. The
archive creates answers for questions like "What constitutes an event?" The
police report thus comprises accidents and violations. The medical record
consists of symptoms and diagnoses. The literary record contains documents
relevant to the author's output. In selecting the important events, or what
constitutes an event, the archive constructs a sense of time. Archival time is
made up of records.

[^record]: I am sidestepping the sometimes important distinction between
*documents* and *records*. See @vismann_files:_2008, 71-101.

In this disparity between everything that can be recorded and the much smaller
subset of details that are actually recorded lies the normative power of an
archive. The archive projects value, because it contains documents that
privilege certain facts over others, reflecting modes of seeing the world that
comply with an archive's collection policy. The National Archives of the
United Kingdom recommend an archive's collection policy further to include
"information which identifies the repository and the governing body,"
"information about the legal status of the repository or other source of its
authority to collect," "information about the scope of, or limitations to, the
[collection] policy," "information about the process of collection," and
"information concerning access" [@_archive_2004]. The collection policy of the
National Archives itself defines the role of the institution in terms of
collecting and "records from all government departments and bodies whose
records are public records under the Public Record's Act" [@_records_2012, 5].
It further continues to identify an interest collecting "public records of
historical value and enduring public interest," which include among other
kinds of material "significant records concerning international relations and
defence," "records of commissions, tribunals, and inquiries," and "case files,
datasets and other records which contain extensive information about the lives
of individual or groups [...] which contribute substantially to public
knowledge and understanding of the people and communities of the UK"
[@_records_2012, 6-7].

Consider QZAP's collection policy in comparison [@qzap_collection_2016]. It
includes first, a definition of what a "zine" is: "a self-published, small
circulation, non-commercial booklet or magazine, usually produced by one
person or a few individuals." Then it narrows that definition to the notion of
a "queer zine," a self-published document related to "people's expression of
gender and sexuality" in a long list of self-identified categories that
include:

> queer, kweer, gay, lesbian, bi, bisexual, fag, faggot, dyke, trans, tranny,
queen, king, princess, Nancy boy, Brucey Boy, nelly, femme, butch, bulldagger,
bulldyke, polyamorous, pansexual, omnisexual, asexual, homo, Saphist, faerie,
and of course Friend of Dorothy.

The list of the kind of materials that the archive is interested in preserving
further includes a number of themes related to:

> sex, same-gender sex, same-gender love, same-gender attraction/desire,
> gender, transgender issues, bisexuality, sexual health, HIV/AIDS, STI's
> (STDs), safer sex, music, popular culture, feminism, activism, politics,
> racism, classism, fat phobia, ageism, traveling, anti-assimilationism, art,
> DIY (do-it-yourself), comics/comix, erotica/porn, journaling/diary zines,
> manifestos, [and] poetry.

Both collection policies identify, in the words of Achille Mbembe "a process
which converts a certain number of documents into items judged to be worthy of
preserving" [@mbembe_power_2012, 20]. Because of this selectionally role, the
archive cannot be treated as a neutral site of knowledge consumption. Rather,
as Ann Stoler and others have argued, readers should treat the archive as a
site of knowledge *production* [@richards_imperial_1993; @stoler_along_2009].
In selecting what documents to preserve, the archive makes evidence available
to the historical record.  Histories are woven from that evidence. The records
that do not make it into the archive become less readily accessible to the
historian. In a sense, they fall out of history.

## Architecture

Space limits the scope of an archive's activity. The limitation of space is
what gives the archive its normative powers. Were an archive to house
everything available, its archivists need not exercise their powers of
discernment. They would collect it all. The apparent lightness of digital
being tempts us to understand digital archives free of space constraints. The
mission statement of Google, one of the world's most popular search engines,
describes the company's goal to "organize the world's information and make it
universally accessible and useful" [@_about_2016]. Unlike the collection
statements we have read above, Google's archiving activity seems to lack the
principle of selection. Similarly, a number of people in the so-called
"life-logging" movement believe that technology has enabled us to remember
everything and that we are entering the age of total recall. Gordon Bell, an
advocate of this movement, writes:

> If you choose, everything you see can be automatically photographed and
spirited away into your personal image library within your e-memory.
Everything you hear can be saved as digital audio files. Software can allow
you to scan your pictures for writing and your audio files for words to come
up with searchable text transcripts of your life. If you choose, you can save
every e-mail you send and receive and archive every Web page you visit. You
can record your location and path through the world. You can record every rise
and dip in your heart rate, body temperature, blood sugar, anxiety, arousal,
and alertness, and log them into your personal health file [@bell_total_2009,
4].

You can begin to understand now why in thinking about archives I evoked not
only an obvious few public archives like the state library, but also the
numerous small private archives that increasingly house details of our
everyday life. A collection of home photographs on a personal computer or a
mobile phone answers all of our minimal definitions of an archive. It consists
of cataloged documents, collected in especially allotted for them space. The
documents are described with meta-data---tags, file names---constituting a
method of organized storage and retrieval not so different from your local
library catalog. Once the purview of large institutions, the archive is now
ubiquitous. We are all archivists, in a sense, engaged in the activity of
capturing, storing, and sorting documents of record.

One cannot deny that the ubiquity of inexpensive storage media is changing the
society's relationship with its archives. If we are to record everything on
our own, what role will sanctioned archives play in the formation of
collective memory? We cannot forget also that despite the evanescent
appearances, digital archives too answer have their place. At some point, the
ephemeral-seeming activity of capturing, sharing, and storing information must
meet the concrete realities of digital storage. All those photographs, videos,
sound files, and texts gain a hefty material presence in aggregate. The very
metaphor of "cloud" storage obscures the realities of massive data centers,
housed in secure bunkers, under surveillance [@hu_prehistory_2015]. The
exclusionary principle returns with a vengeance. In many cases, the digital
archive is not a public archive, at least not in the sense of a public
library. The public does not usually have direct access to digitally archived
information at the site of its inscription. Law sometimes prohibits even the
circumvention of those security mechanisms contained in one's own devices
[@ginsburg_legal_2005].

The physical architecture of archives ultimately governs access to
information. This holds true for brick and mortar archives just as it does for
digital ones. A critical approach to studying archives must include the
examination of physical barriers to entry and exit. Under closer examination,
we understand the utopian vision of total recall to exclude global populations
without access to the internet and those who access the internet through
low-fidelity connections on tiny screens and in internet cafés on rented
machines [@qiu_working-class_2009; @wyche_facebook_2013;
@mariscal_aviles_informational_2016]. The archive does not provide neutral
grounds for the storage and access to information. Because the archive cannot
be commensurate with the passing reality that it attempts to capture, the idea
of the archive itself implies something left out.

## Catalog

The taxonomy, or the way of organizing information, constitutes another axis
of exclusion in the archive. What happens to documents that are archived, but
not cataloged? Such documents are lost to time. They are technically in the
archive, but practically inaccessible. In this way, a document within the
archive relates not only to physical space but also to the epistemological
architecture of the catalog. The catalog locates the document in the
ideational space, just as the building---stacks and bookshelves---locates it
in the physical. To be lost in one is to be lost in the other. Thus in
addition to asking What was collected? and How is it accessed? we should also
ask, How is it organized? What logics and what epistemological regimes govern
the order of documents in the archive?

In his short story "The Library of Babel," Jorge Luis Borges imagines
the world of an infinite library that contains all possible books:

> *All*---the detailed history of the future, the autobiographies of the
archangels, the faithful catalog of the Library, thousands and thousands of
false catalogs, the proof of the falsity of those false catalogs, a proof of
the falsity of the *true* catalog [...] the true story of your death, the
translation of every book into every language, the interpolations of every
book into all books [...] [@borges_library_1998, 115].

The catalog, as we can see, is unlike the other books in that it is a map of
their location. It is the key to the bibliographic universe. The inhabitants
of the infinite library travel on a quest of find the catalog: "a catalog of
catalogs," "the cipher and perfect compendium *of all other books*.
[@borges_library_1998, 113 & 116]" The librarian would find such a book would
be analogous to a God, Borges writes [@borges_library_1998, 117]. The catalog
grows in importance in the proportion to the size of the archive.

The advent of powerful computational archive technologies---crawlers indexers,
and classifiers---have transformed the nature of catalogs in our world.
Before computers, archivists relied on systems of social filtration or
organize their materials. Ask yourself this: How did you find the movie you
watched recently or even the chapter in front of you? Traditionally, search
and discovery of new information was facilitated by complex processes of canon
formation. One finds a book or a film because it is assigned in class, because
it was advertised, because a friend recommended it, or the recommendation came
from a critic. These social mechanisms of filtration reify into
epistemological categories. Thus a reflection on genre by book critics and
book sellers results in the isles of the book store dedicated to the genres of
fantasy, classics, detective fiction, and so on. In the isles of a book store
we once again observe the close entanglement of document, architecture, and
epistemology.

Classification lies at the heart of library science [@robinson_rhizome_2010].
The Dewey Decimal Classification system, for example, has guided the
organization of libraries by subjects for over a century. This way of
organizing material aids in discovery: a library patron looking for a specific
book finds a shelf of books on a similar topic. A way of organizing material
by alphabet or by size alone would result in different kind of discovery.
Classification systems provide the scaffolding for everyday knowledge work.
They are difficult to perceive, however, because they are ubiquitous and often
invisible [@bowker_sorting_1999]. Think of the various classification systems
that surround our daily life: the physician classifies according to a list of
available diagnoses and billable insurance codes, the judge classifies
according to the legal categories, the academic classifies according to
scientific categories, students structure their days according to the course
catalog. Not often seen, the catalog is everywhere.

The job of an archivist involves classification---an activity that projects
order among documents and architectures. One can think of classification as a
way of organizing things, a way of placing documents in accord with the
spatial requirements of storage. Classification converts mental, ideational
categories into spatial arrangements of things, which together make up the
archive. Jacques Derrida has called this organizing activity the power of
*consignation*. He wrote:

> By consignation, we do not only mean, in the ordinary sense of the word, the
> act of consigning residence or of entrusting so as to put into a reserve (to
> consign, to deposit), in a place and on a substrate, but here the act of
> consigning and through *gathering together signs* [...] Consignation aims to
> to coordinate a single corpus, in a system of synchrony in which all the
> elements articulate the unity of an ideal configuration
> [@derrida_archive_1995, 10].

In maintaining order, the archivist imposes a structure on the world, creating
an organized space within the archive which. The archive draws a boundary
between the ordered inside and the chaotic (by archival logic) and the
disordered outside. A traditional archive collection thus thrives on the logic
of exclusion: some things are in, others are out. In addition to preserving
things---documents, artifacts, records, evidence---the archivist preserves a
taxonomy---a lexicon, a way of ordering things. The archivist of the future
may look at our libraries and wonder at the strange, simplistic perhaps, and
alien ways in which we used to organize our stuff.[^foucault]

The principle of exclusion operates by different logics in the age of
ubiquitous connectivity, cheap storage, algorithmic sorting, and social media.
The role of a culture critic is subsumed by the wisdom of the crowd. Instead
of trusting one "expert" opinion, we increasingly rely on the aggregate
opinions of many, through reviews and recommendations: if you like this you
may also like this, others who liked X also usually like Y. The archive begins
to contain multiple logics, multiple systems of classification that compete,
undermine, and strengthen each other. The classification system is no longer
the work of a single man, John Dewey; archive dwellers bring with them their
own tags and categories. The digital archive encourages its participants to
engage in this organizing activity. The archive managers extract monetize
tumultuous social engagement. The digital archive retains the trace of archive
dwelling. All visitors and inhabitants of the archive become archivists
themselves. Their searching and organizing activity is further commodified to
extract value from the catalog.

Furthermore, the inherently social activity of archive dwelling is augmented
by automated tools. Archivists in their own right, algorithmic crawlers,
indexers, and classifiers learn from human behavior to collect, analyze, and
catalog data on their own.[^crawl] Web crawlers follow links and disperse
through the network to search for new material. Indexers begin the task of
assigning keywords and categories. Supervised machine-learning classifiers
apply existing categories, tagged by humans, to new collections. As the name
implies, their task is to classify or to sort things into piles. These piles
are then assigned labels that help humans sort through vast amounts of data.
Unsupervised learning algorithms notice patterns that are not apparent to the
human eye and mind. The so called "deep learning" heuristics mimic the neural
structure of human brains to further aid in sorting and classification
[@li_introduction_2008; @flach_machine_2012; @schmidhuber_deep_2015].

[^crawl]: See for example @gupta_relevant_2013.

The simple task of using a search engine to find a piece of information belies
the complex realities of the digital archive. Advances in storage media
coupled with novel computational methodologies have made it possible to
imagine a near feature in which everything can be stored and everything can be
organized. The history of the archive warns otherwise. The exclusionary
principle will continue to operate as long as the archive remains an
instrument of economic and political power. The larger and more inclusive the
archive, the more appealing it becomes as an instrument for control and
subjugation of its dwellers. Machine intelligence extends and deepens human
distinctions. Unlike the archivist who labors in public and follows legible
collection policies, the swarm of algorithmic machine archivists operate in
the dark, usually without decree or consent. Archive dwellers are moving
towards what some have called the "black box society," governed by the "hidden
logics of search" [@pasquale_hidden_2015]. These new computational realities
require archivists equipped with the sharp tools of critical theory,
information science, and software engineering. The sauntering iron and the
binding needle may be needed to occupy free and equitable archives, archives
that are built in the open, archives suitable for human habitation.

[^foucault]: In this regard see the Preface in @foucault_order_1971, xv-xxiv.

## Suggested Reading

On the power of archives to create and to shelter themselves from memory read
@derrida_archive_1995. @gitelman_paper_2014 and @vismann_files:_2008 examine
documents and records from the perspective of media theory.
@hamilton_refiguring_2012 is an important collection of essays on the archive
in and beyond post-colonial studies. On the relationship between the archive
and empire read @richards_imperial_1993, @mbembe_power_2012, and
@peterson_power_2012. @qiu_working-class_2009 and @sundaram_pirate_2011 give
the reader thorough ethnographic accounts of contemporary archival dwelling
outside of Europe and North America. @mayer-schonberger_delete:_2009 and
@pasquale_hidden_2015 explore the social and political consequences of
algorithmic archive making.

## Bibliography
