---
title: Archive
author: Dennis Yi Tenen

---

An archive can be as large as a library or as small as a bookshelf. What are
the minimal requirements to build an archive? How is a pile of haphazardly
arranged papers differ from an archive? Look around you and notice the
furniture, navigate through your mobile device where you keep your notes and
your photos. Think of your social media usage, your habits of correspondence,
the way you keep in touch with your family and friends, the habits of keeping
a journal, taking notes, finding basic facts about the world. All of these
involve an archive of some kind. We are surrounded by archives; we live in
them and through them. Archives mediate. Like water for fish, they form the
medium of our knowledge gathering and finding activity. If, as the headlines
tell us, we live in an information age, the archive is a way of making sense
of that information. More than making sense, they help keep information *at
hand*, to handle it, pour over, organize, and process. To archive is not just
a mental activity, in other words, it is physical as well. An archive is a way
of ordering things.

The archive is also an interface between internal mental states---what I know
now---and the external, physical representation of that knowledge---what I
could know at any time. The book on my shelf is not just a book, it is a part
of my mental furnishings. In many cases, I don't remember the contents of that
book, but I know where it is. I know I could get to it if needed. It is not as
close to me as a memory, accessible immediately and at once, but also not as
far as an obscure fact with which I have never had any contact. The book on my
shelf, the notebook in a pile on my desk, occupies a space somewhere in the
middle of the spectrum, between my rather limited ability to remember a few
ideas presently and the unlimited amount of ideas out there. My documents, the
ones that belong to me, the ones I organized neatly on my desk and on my
virtual desktop, are ideas that I used to have. They are also a part of me,
but just slightly farther away than my thoughts. I feel safe knowing where
they are and how to find them. Think of the discomfort we feel when someone
disturbs our archives: if someone were to reorganize your music collection for
example, or scramble the order of your notes, or rearrange the books on your
bookshelf. One feels lost and violated precisely because the archive is so
crucial to our ability to find our way through a forest of data. It is a
small, organized space of private order in the chaos of information.

Not all islands of order are small and private. Some islands grow into
empires: state archives that project collective power. The aggregate of
personal memories gives us our shared, cultural memory, our heritage. That
sense of shared culture does not exist in the ether. It is reflected in
publicly and privately supported collections like the Library of Congress and
the Guggenheim Museum. These are large public archives, preserving art and
rooks, public in the sense of a collective enterprise (not necessarily
funding). They represent a vision of communal remembrance. It is *a* vision,
however, not *the* vision. Someone, somewhere made a decision about what to
archive and where. State-sanctioned archives reflect the priorities of a
bureaucracy, resulting in archives like the State Archive of the Russian
Federation, Ottoman Archives, New York State Archives, West Indies Federal
Archives Centre, and China's Central Archives among many others. Smaller,
grass-roots public archives are often maintained by independent organizations
like the *Archiv der Jungendkulturen* in Berlin or the North American Queer
Zine Archive Project (QZAP) out of Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Other dynamics come into play when the archives grow from islands to
continents of knowledge. In the state archive we begin to think about the
forces of inclusion and exclusion. Who is allowed to enter and who isn't?
Which materials are worthy preservation and which are relegated to the heap of
perishable ephemera? In this way archives can amplify certain historical
narratives while suppressing others. The archive by its very logic projects
the logic of distinction. The archive of the court differentiates between
criminals and law-abiding citizens. The archive of the hospital embodies the
distinction between the healthy and sick. The archive of peer-reviewed
scientific publication separates meaningful knowledge from rumor or mere
speculation.

Can there be an archive without records or documents? Do the contents of my
pocket---my keys, some change, a crumpled receipt, a piece of
lint---constitute an archive of a kind? What isn't an archive? I would argue
here that an archive requires at least these three components: first, a number
of documents or artifacts to be collected; second a place to store them; and
third, a system of organization.

An archive without records, documents, or objects would be an archive in the
name only. We could call it "the library of nothing" but for all purposes it
would resemble an empty room; it would be a promise of an archive---that is,
the promise of records, documents, or objects to come. Could we imagine an
archive without space? A virtual collection perhaps? Again, the question seems
nonsensical. A virtual archive, a website for example, is still a collection
of something occupying the same space, however virtual. An archive of
documents on paper, a list of books to be purchased for example, is again only
an idea, a promise of an archive. Proximity of material is required. Finally,
can an archive exist without a method of organization like a catalog or an
index? Again, it seems not. In the Jewish tradition, holy texts like the Torah
are not to be discarded. For this reason, special sealed rooms, called the
Genizah, have existed to house worn-out documents since the ancient times. The
discovery of such rooms have led to important contributions to the study of
liturgy and poetry in Judaic studies. But do the Genizah constitute an
archive? Or do they become an archive once they are discovered and cataloged?
The catalog is what gives the collection its order. Without the catalog a pile
of papers on my disk is just a pile. The catalog describes the documents and,
most importantly, it tells us how and where to find them. Document,
architecture, and an epistemic order are all required to constitute an
archive. Let us examine each of these archival components in its turn.

## Documents

The archive is composed of *documents*---that is, physical objects of record.
From the infinitude of possible descriptions about reality, the record
preserves that which is important.  Think of an obvious example, like a police
report. A police report captures the details relevant to an incident. Police
officers who would write a novel at the scene of an accident would be
dismissed of their duties. The archiving practice of law enforcement requires
records of a particular kind. The archive of a novelist will contain documents
drastically different than those of a police report or a medical record. The
archive creates answers for questions like "What constitutes an event?" The
police report consists of accidents and violations.  The medical record
consists of symptoms and diagnoses. The literary record contains documents
relevant to the author's output. In selecting the important events, or what
constitutes an event, the archive constructs a sense of time. Archival time is
made up of records.

In this disparity between everything that can be recorded and the much smaller
subset of details that are actually recorded lies the normative power of an
archive. The archive projects value, because it contains documents that
privilege certain facts over others, reflecting modes of seeing the world that
comply with an archive's collection policy. The National Archives of the
United Kingdom recommend an archive's collection policy further to include
"information which identifies the repository and the governing body,"
"information about the legal status of the repository or other source of its
authority to collect," "information about the scope of, or limitations to, the
[collection] policy," "information about the process of collection," and
"information concerning access." The collection policy of the National
Archives itself defines the role of the institution in terms of collecting and
"records from all government departments and bodies whose records are public
records under the Public Record's Act" [@ p5]. It further continues to
identify an interest collecting "public records of historical value and
enduring public interest," which include among other kinds of material
"significant records concerning international relations and defence," "records
of commissions, tribunals, and inquiries," and "case files, datasets and other
records which contain extensive information about the lives of individual or
groups [...] which contribute substantially to public knowledge and
understanding of the people and communities of the UK" [@ 6-7].

Consider QZAP's collection policy in comparison. It includes first, a
definition of what a "zine" is: "a self-published, small circulation,
non-commercial booklet or magazine, usually produced by one person or a few
individuals." Then it narrows that definition to the notion of a "queer zine,"
a self-published document related to "people's expression of gender and
sexuality" in a long list of self-identified categories that include:

> queer, kweer, gay, lesbian, bi, bisexual, fag, faggot, dyke, trans, tranny,
queen, king, princess, Nancy boy, Brucey Boy, nelly, femme, butch, bulldagger,
bulldyke, polyamorous, pansexual, omnisexual, asexual, homo, Saphist, faerie,
and of course Friend of Dorothy.

The list of the kind of materials that the archive is interested in preserving
further includes a number of themes related to:

> sex, same-gender sex, same-gender love, same-gender attraction/desire,
> gender, transgender issues, bisexuality, sexual health, HIV/AIDS, STI's
> (STDs), safer sex, music, popular culture, feminism, activism, politics,
> racism, classism, fat phobia, ageism, traveling, anti-assimilationism, art,
> DIY (do-it-yourself), comics/comix, erotica/porn, journaling/diary zines,
> manifestos, [and] poetry.

The collection policy identifies, in the words of Achille Mbembe "a process
which converts a certain number of documents into items judged to be worthy of
preserving" [@mbembe_power_2012, 20]. Because of this selectionally role, the
archive cannot be treated as a neutral site of knowledge consumption. Rather,
Ann Stoler and others have argued, readers should treat the archive as a site
of knowledge *production* [@stoler_along_2009] In selecting what documents to
preserve, the archive makes evidence available to the historical record.
Histories are woven from that evidence. The records that do not make it into
the archive, become less readily accessible or not accessible at all. They
fall out of history.

## Architecture

Space is the limitation on the scope of an archive's activity. The limitation
of space is what gives the archive its normative powers. Were an archive to
house everything available, its archivists need not exercise their powers of
discernment. They would collect it all. It seems tempting then to understand
digital archives to be free of space constraint. The mission statement of
Google, one of the world's most popular search engines, describes the company
mission to "organize the world's information and make it universally
accessible and useful" [@google]. Unlike the collection statements we have
read above, Google's seem to lack the principle of selection.

You can begin to understand now why in thinking about archives I
evoked not only the obvious few public archives like the state library, but
also the numerous small private archives that increasingly house details of
our everyday life. A collection of home photographs on a personal computer
answers all of our minimal definitions of an archive. It consists of
documents, collected in a specially alloted for them space, and described with
meta-data---tags, file names, a method of organized storage and retrieval.
Once the purview of large institutions, the archive is now ubiquitous. We are
all archivists, in a sense, engaged in the activity of capturing, storing, and
sorting records.

The dream of preserving everything.


Who gets access? How? Is there a guard at the door? Do you get searched? How
are the rooms arranged?
Shadow Libraries

## Metadata

How are things organized? The scratch collector.

## Further Reading
